Chapter 4. Ownership

Ownership is Rust's most unique feature and has deep implications for the rest of the language. 
it permits or enables rust to make memory safety guarantess without needing a garbage collector. Therefore its important to understand how ownership works.


Ownership  is a set of rules that govern how a rust program manages memory. All programs have to manage the way they use a compoters memory while runing.

Because ownership is a new concept for many programmers, it does take some time to get used to it.

The good news is that that the more experiences you become with rust and the rules of the ownership system the easier you will find it to naturally devlope code that is afe and efficient. 


when you understand ownership, you will have a solid foundation for understanding the 
features that make rust unique. In this chapter, you will leanrd ownership by working through some examples that focus on very common data structure, strings.




The stack and the Heap

THE Stack stores values in the order in which they arrive and removes the values in the opposite order. This is refered to as last in, first out ( LIFO). 

All data stored on the stack must have a known fixed size,. 
Data with unkown size at compile time must be stored on the heap instead.


The Heap;

The heap is less organized; when you put data on the heap, you request a certain amount of space. the memory allocatore finds and empty sport in the heap that hs big enough, marks it as being in use, and returns a pointer which is the address of that location. 
This is process is called allocating on the heap or just allocating. 

Now because the pointer to the heap is known and now has a fixed size, you can now store the pointer on the stack. 

Pushing to the stack is much faster tha allocating on the heap because the allocatoer never has to search for a place to store new data.

Accessing data on the heap is generally slower because the allocator has to follow the pointer to get there all the time and this is time consuming.


Therefore contemporary processors are faster if they jump around less in memory. 



Keeping track of what parts of the code are using what data on the heap, minimizing the amount of duplicate data on the heap and cleaning unused data on the heap so that you dont run out of space arll problems that ownership addresses. 

Once you understand ownership. you wond need to think about the stack and the heap very often. 

But knowing that the main purpose of ownership is to manage heap data can help explain why it works the way it does.
 



    Ownership rules


    - Each value is rust has an owner 
    - there can only be one owner at a time
    - when the owner goes out of scope, the value will be dropped.



    Variable scope

- A scope is the range within a program for which an item is valid.


References and Borrowing

A reference is like a pointer, in that its an address we can follow to access the data stored at that address; that data is owned by some other variable. 

Unlike a pointer, a reference is guaranteed to point to a valid value of a particular type for the life of that reference.

The ampersands represent reference, i.e instead of;

let len = calculate_length(s1); // we instead use the below code
let len = calculate_length(&s1) // with & representing the reference. 

even at the level of the function declearation you also need to precise that you will be receiving a reference. 
i.e 
calculate_length(s:&String) -> usize {
    s.len()
}

An analogy of this can be a limited liabilty company.  if you borrow moeny for your company and then the company crashes, they cannot sew you because you do not have ownership, you are limited by liability.

Just like variables functions are immutable by default but we can always make them mutable similar to adding the mut ie. &mut s1


How ever mutable references have one big restriction; 

if you have a mutable reference to a value, you can have no other references to that value. 

So you can have one and only mutable reference to a variable.  


This helps to prevent data races at compile time. 

A data race is similar to a race conditon and happens when these behaviours occur;

- two or more pointers access the same data at the same time.
- at least one of the pointers is being used to write to the data. 
- there is no mechanims being used to synchronize access to the data.


Data races cause undefined behaviour and can be defficult to diagnise and fix when your trying to track them down at run time.
rust prevents this problem by refusing to compile code with data races. 


However, we can actually use curly braces to create a new scope, allowinf multiple mutable references, just not simultaneous ones. 
since one goes out of scope when the curly brace ends, it makes sense that we can create others should we want to do just that. 

Dangling references

In languages with pointers, its easy to erroneously create a dangling pointer - a pointer that references a location in memory that have been given to someone else - by freeing some memory while preserving a pointer to that memory.

In rust, the compiler guarantees that references will never be dangling references. the compiler ensures that if you have a reference data, the compiler will ensure that the daya will not go out of scope before the reference to the data does.



Rust prevent these dangling references with a compile time error.
